.\"Modified from man(1) of FreeBSD, the NetBSD mdoc.template, and mdoc.samples.
.\"See Also:
.\"man mdoc.samples for a complete listing of options
.\"man mdoc for the short list of editing options
.\"/usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
.Dd February 28, 2010    \" DATE 
.Dt SPINIFY	1      \" Program name and manual section number 
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME                 \" Section Header - required - don't modify 
.Nm spinify
.\" The following lines are read in generating the apropos(man -k) database. Use only key
.\" words here as the database is built based on the words here and in the .ND line. 
.\".Nm Yet another name for the same program.
.\" Use .Nm macro to designate other names for the documented program.
.Nd Modelling the Ising model on curved surfaces.

.Sh SYNOPSIS             \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
.Op Fl g Ar file | Fl r Ar N M | Fl s Ar N | Fl u Ar N
.Op Fl ekm
.Op options

.Sh DESCRIPTION          \" Section Header - required - don't modify
The two dimensional Ising model tries to explain magnetic phenomena in
thin layers of matter. The atoms are represented as nodes of a
graph and their interactions as edges of that same graph. In the mean
field model, nodes interact only with their closest neighbours. The
interaction depends on the
.Ar spin
of the atoms (which can be either +1 or
-1 in the Ising model) and on an interaction coefficient
.Ar J .
.Pp
.Nm
is a simulator for the Ising model on different surfaces. It uses Markov
chain Monte Carlo methods to sample the spin configuration space of a
given graph. It is able to generate graphs on the plane torus and on
the sphere and then to run simulations on these graphs. It can measure
internal energy, magnetization and magnetic susceptibility.
.Pp
When running the program, you must specify exactly one of
.Fl g , Fl r , Fl s
or
.Fl u .
This specifies whether the graph to be used is read from a file or not
and, in the latter case, if the graph to be generated is rectangular,
spherical with even node distribution or spherical with uniform node
distribution.
.Pp
A
.Ar rectangular graph
is a graph in which the nodes are arranged in a grid isomorphic to a
subset of the two dimensional integer lattice. The length of the graph
is the number of nodes along an horizontal line and its height is the
number of nodes along a vertical line. In order to avoid difficulties
with boundary conditions, the graph is wrapped around a plane torus.
Every node has degree four, its neighbours being the nodes right above,
below, to the right and to the left of it.
.Pp
A
.Ar spherical graph
is a graph whose nodes lie on the surface of a sphere. The nodes are
distributed randomly according to either a uniform distribution or to
an even distribution. A uniform distribution is one in which the
probability that any disk of fixed radius on the sphere contains a node
is the same. An even distribution is one for which the minimum distance
between any two nodes is minimized.
.Pp
To create an even
node distribution on the sphere,
.Nm
starts with a uniform distribution and then implements an electric
repulsion between the nodes. The force that a node v feels is the sum of
all forces due to nodes whose distance to v is less than a certain
.Ar range .
The force is then dampened by a factor that depends on the size of the
graph. Electric repulsion is continued as long as the minimum distance
is below a certain fraction of the optimal value.
.Pp
The user can ask
.Nm
to write the graph data into a file by providing the
.Fl o Ar file
option. Depending on the choice of ouput (
.Fl -raw
or
.Fl -python )
the output file does not have the same syntax. If the raw ouput is
chosen (this is the default), in the output file, the first line is the
number of nodes in the graph, the second line is the number of edges in
the graph. All subsequent lines are edges given by their endpoints. If
the python format is chosen, the output file can be executed directly by
the Python interpreter to produce a three dimensional view of the graph.
.Pp
Once the graph is loaded into memory, the simulation starts. The Monte
Carlo algorithm is a mixture of the Swendsen-Wang algorithm and the
Wolff algorithm. A state is a given configuration of spin values on the
graph. The algorithm ensures that probability of finding a given state
is very close to the probability predicted by the Gibbs distribution.
Thus, measurements that are made can be averaged to obtain the thermal
average. Note that by default, no measurements are made. The user must
tell the program which measurements to make using the
.Fl e ,
.Fl k ,
and
.Fl m
options.
.Pp
By default, results from the simulation are written to standard output
and can be redirected to a file of your choice for further analysis of
the data. You can tell
.Nm
to output the data directly into a file using the
.Fl o Ar file
option.
.Pp
Again, depending on the choice of ouput (
.Fl -raw
or
.Fl -python )
the output will not be formatted in the same way. For the raw output, a
line contains the beta value (i.e., the inverse of the temperature) and
the measurements separated by spaces. The python output is very similar
except that it comes preformatted so that the Python interpreter can
execute the file to produce graphs of the measurements versus
temperature.

.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width
.It General options:
.Bl -tag -width -indent  \" Differs from above in tag removed 
.It Fl c Ar file , Fl -config-file Ar file
Read configuration options from
.Ar file .
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Print a help message detailing all the available options.
.It Fl v , Fl -version
Print version information.
.El
.It Graph options
(these options are mutually exclusive):
.Bl -tag -width -ident
.It Fl g Ar file , Fl -graph-infile Ar file
Read graph data from
.Ar file .
The input file has to have the raw format described above otherwise the
file parser will fail to read the graph data correctly and may produce
unpredictable results.
.It Fl r Ar N M , Fl -rectangle Ar N M
Use a rectangular graph with length
.Ar N
and height
.Ar M .
Both arguments must be positive integers.
.It Fl s Ar N , Fl -sphere-even Ar N
Use a spherical graph with
.Ar N
nodes and an even node distribution. The argument must be a positive
integer.
.It Fl u Ar N , Fl -sphere-uniform Ar N
Use a spherical graph with
.Ar N
nodes and a uniform node distribution. The argument must be a positive
integer.
.El
.It Temperature options:
.Bl -tag -width -ident
.It Fl T Ar n m i , Fl -temperatures Ar n m i
The simulation will be done at temperatures ranging from
.Ar n
to
.Ar m
with increments by
.Ar i
Kelvin. If
.Ar i
is not given, the simulation is done at 50 temperatures evenly spread
between
.Ar n
and
.Ar m .
If only
.Ar n
is given, the simulation is done for this temperature only. The first
two arguments must be striclty positive real numbers. If
.Ar n
is less than
.Ar m ,
then
.Ar i
has to be positive.  Otherwise, it has to be negative.
.El
.It Measurements options:
.Bl -tag -width -ident
.It Fl e , Fl -internalEnergy
Measure internal energy per spin. Internal energy per spin is defined to
be u = (J / N) \\sum_{adjacent nodes i, j} s_i s_j where s_i is the spin
of node i, N is the number of nodes in the graph and J is the
interaction coefficient.
.It Fl k , Fl -susceptibility
Measure magnetic susceptibility. It is defined as
\\chi = \\beta N (<M^2> - <M>^2) where M is the magnetization and <> are
used to indicate thermal average.
.It Fl m , Fl -magnetization
Measure magnetization. Magnetization is defined as
M = (1/N) |\\sum_{i = 1}^N s_i|. It corresponds to the average spin
value.
.El
.It Output options:
.Bl -tag -width -ident
.It Fl o Ar file , Fl -output Ar file
Write simulation data to
.Ar file .
Details about the content of the file are given in the description
section above.
.It Fl p , Fl -python
Output data in a Python-friendly way.
.It Fl r , Fl -raw
Output the data in raw format, i.e., outputs only the data without any
kind of decorations. This is the preferred format for data analysis
using anything else than Python.
.It Fl w Ar file , Fl -write-graph Ar file
Write the graph data to
.Ar file .
Details about the content of the file are given in the description
section above.
.El                      \" Ends the list
.It Simulation options:
.Bl -tag -width -ident
.It Fl -correlThreshold Ar X
The decorrelation time is the number of iterations required before the
correlation between measurements drops below correlThreshold. This
option sets the correlThreshold to
.Ar X .
It has to be a real number between
-1 and 1.
.It Fl -decorrelIter Ar N
Sets the number of measurements for the calculation of the decorrelation
time to
.Ar N .
The higher this value, the more accurate the decorrelation time.
However, setting this value too high slows the execution of the
algorithm. This argument must be a strictly positive integer.
.It Fl -Jval Ar N
Set the value ot the interation coefficient
.Ar J
to
.Ar N .
Set this value to -1 for ferromagnetism and to 1 for antiferromagnetism.
This argument has to be an integer.
.It Fl -maxDecorrelTime Ar N
This is an upper bound on the decorrelation time. If the calculated
value is above
.Ar N
it is discarded and
.Ar N
is used instead. This argument must be a strictly positive integer.
.It Fl -minDecorrelTime Ar N
This is a lower bound on the decorrelation time. If the calculated
value is below
.Ar N
it is discarded and
.Ar N
is used instead. This argument must be a strictly positive integer.
.It Fl -nInitTherm Ar N
Every time the temperature is changed, the program performs
.Ar N
iterations of the Swendsen-Wang-Wolff algorithm before starting
measurements. It is very important to set this value high enough because
otherwise the graph spin configuration will not be distributed according
to the Gibbs distribution. This argument must be a strictly positive
integer.
.It Fl -nMeasures Ar N
For each measurement, take
.Ar N
measurements to compute the thermal average. The higher this number, the
more accurate the measurement. This argument must be a strictly positive
integer.
.El
.It Surface options
(used only for even node distribution on the sphere):
.Bl -tag -width -ident
.It Fl -dampingExp Ar X
The dampening factor for the electric repulsion has the form |G|^X - N
where |G| is the number of nodes in the graph.
.It Fl -dampingSub Ar N
The dampening factor for the electric repulsion has the form |G|^X - N
where |G| is the number of nodes in the graph.
.It Fl -objectiveRatio Ar X
The electric repulsion is continued as long as the minimum distance is
not at least (1 - 
.Ar X )
times the optimal solution. The larger this value, the closer the
distribution will be to uniform. The smaller the value, the more even
the distribution. However, the ratio should not be below 0.15 since it
might be impossible to reach the stopping condition then.
.Ar X
must be between 0 and 1.
.It Fl -rangeMultiplier Ar N
This modifies the range of the electric force. It must be a striclty
positive real number.
.El
.El
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT      \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -tag -width "ENV_VAR_1" -indent \" ENV_VAR_1 is width of the string ENV_VAR_1
.\" .It Ev ENV_VAR_1
.\" Description of ENV_VAR_1
.\" .It Ev ENV_VAR_2
.\" Description of ENV_VAR_2
.\" .El                      
.Sh FILES                \" File used or created by the topic of the man page
.Bl -tag -width "/Users/joeuser" -compact
.It Pa ~/.spinifyrc
User configuration file. If the user does not specify a configuration
file with the
.Fl c Ar file
option, this file is searched for second.
.It Pa .spinifyrc
Folder configuration data. If the user does not specify a configuration
file with the
.Fl c Ar file
option, this file is searched for first.
.It Pa $(docdir)/spinifyrc.sample
A sample configuration file containing all possible options.
.\".It Pa /Users/joeuser/Library/really_long_file_name
.\"FILE_2 description
.\".El                      \" Ends the list
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS       \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -diag
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .El
.\".Sh SEE ALSO 
.\" List links in ascending order by section, alphabetically within a section.
.\" Please do not reference files that do not exist without filing a bug report
.\".Xr spinifyrc 5
.\" .Sh HISTORY           \" Document history if command behaves in a unique manner 
.Sh AUTHORS
Written by Loic Seguin-C. <loicseguin@gmail.com>
.Pp
Main website: <http://bitbucket.org/loicseguin/spinify>
.Pp
Copyright (C) 2009, 2010 Loic Seguin-C. Free use of this software is
granted under the terms of the BSD license.
.Sh BUGS
Please report bugs to
.Bk words
<http://bitbucket.org/loicseguin/spinify/issues/>
